 Banks have undoubtedly cut back as the plethora of new rules has made it difficult for their trading arms to eke out a satisfactory profit. Investors may not be able to buy and sell them quickly, cheaply and without moving the price. They are worried about bonds of all sorts, which are much less heavily traded than shares, currencies and commodities. In America, investment funds used to hold only three times as many bonds as banks. Funds that track corporate bonds often promise their investors their money back whenever they want it, despite the relative illiquidity of their assets. Meanwhile, investors are typically entitled to their money back within seven days of asking for it. The result is an imbalance. The result of this lopsidedness, pessimists say, are events like the “flash crash” last year, during which yields on Treasuries suddenly tumbled by 0.34 percentage points for no apparent reason—an extraordinary shift for the bedrock security of the global financial system. Broadly speaking, trading desks are still happy to match buyers and sellers but are reluctant to commit to a purchase before lining up a buyer. There have been several attempts to set up trading platforms, but few have attracted much volume. Another solution is for the asset managers to bypass the banks. Now they hold 20 times as many, according to the Federal Reserve (see chart). Even if such schemes get off the ground, asset managers cannot fully substitute for banks. Maybe their retrenchment has indeed made markets riskier. They do not have as much purchasing power, since their balance-sheets are not swollen with borrowed money. They can also invest in derivatives linked to the index, which are typically more liquid than individual bonds. Regulators are mindful of all this. BlackRock, the world’s biggest, has said it is limiting its exposure to certain bonds as a result. If faced with a rash of redemptions, these can be sold off without much loss. In Europe, where banks have trimmed investment banking even more, the situation is if anything worse. 
